Init docs for plugins (#2)
gotify/website: docs/plugin-write.md

---
id: plugin-write
title: Writing Plugins
---

## Description

Lets take a closer look at the minimal plugin instance we created in the [intro](/docs/plugin) part:

```golang
// Plugin is plugin instance
type Plugin struct{}

// Enable implements plugin.Plugin
func (c *Plugin) Enable() error {
	return nil
}

// Disable implements plugin.Plugin
func (c *Plugin) Disable() error {
	return nil
}
```

Now it has only implemented the base [`Plugin`](https://godoc.org/github.com/gotify/plugin-api#Plugin) interface, and does nothing at all. To give it more functionalities, we need to implement more interfaces on `*Plugin`.

## APIs

### Intro

The APIs are provided as interfaces and has generally two forms:

> The first form is called after plugins are started(after `Enabled` is called). They require the plugin to implements some methods which is called on user request to update information or provide feedbacks. An example is [`Displayer`](https://godoc.org/github.com/gotify/plugin-api#Displayer), which obtains an instruction generated by the plugin, which is then relayed to the user by gotify.

Reviewer: This is not exactly correct, the display is shown even when the plugin is disabled. I guess it would be easier to understand to explicitly write to each plugin description when the methods are called. What do you think?

Author: Yep, I have added them in the comments.

> The second form is called before plugins are started(before `Enabled` is called). The methods are in the form of `^Register(.+)Handler$`, which plugins will implement to get a callback to the gotify engine to realize some functionalities. An example is [`Messenger`](https://godoc.org/github.com/gotify/plugin-api#Messenger), which is called with a callback that can be called at any time to send a message to the user.

Reviewer: It would be great, if you could add linebreaks after the end of a sentence. Then the lines will not be that long

### API Interfaces

> _These are all API interfaces exposed by gotify. Some interface implementations are omitted in the examples._

Reviewer: Currently all interfaces are documented here right?

Author: Yes. I will update them to the latest schema recently.

}

func (c *Plugin) SetStorageHandler(h plugin.StorageHandler) {
    c.storageHandler = h
}

type Storage struct {
    EnabledTimes uint `json:"enabled_times"`
}

func (c *Plugin) Enable() error {
    storage := new(Storage)
    storageBytes, err := c.storageHandler.Load()
    if err != nil {
        return err
    }
    if len(storageBytes) == 0 {
        storage.EnabledTimes = 1
        storageBytes, _ = json.Marshal(storage)
        c.storageHandler.Save(storageBytes)
    } else {
        json.Unmarshal(storageBytes, storage)
    }
    log.Printf("This plugin has been enabled %d times.", storage.EnabledTimes)
    return nil
}
```

#### Webhooker

[`Webhooker`](https://godoc.org/github.com/gotify/plugin-api#Webhooker) is used to register custom gin handlers. The base path can be obtained by calling [`mux.BasePath()`](https://godoc.org/github.com/gin-gonic/gin#RouterGroup.BasePath), which is kept consistent between restarts. Useful to register webhook handlers. In theory you can register a complete UI here also.

```golang
// Plugin is the plugin instance
type Plugin struct {
    basePath string
}

// RegisterWebhook implements plugin.Webhooker

> func (c *Plugin) RegisterWebhook(mux gin.RouterGroup) {

Reviewer: Do not forget to apply the changes from gotify/plugin-api#2

    c.basePath = mux.BasePath()
    mux.POST("/hook", func(c *gin.Context) {
        // Processes webhook and take actions(sending messages, etc.)
    })
}

// GetDisplay implements plugin.Displayer
func (c *Plugin) GetDisplay() string {

>     return fmt.Sprintf("Set your webhook URL to %s and you are all set", path.Join(c.basePath, "hook"))

Reviewer: Add discussed in gotify/server#110 add a example for obtaining the full url.

---
id: plugin-write
title: Writing Plugins
---

## Description

Lets take a closer look at the minimal plugin instance we created in the [intro](plugin.md) part:

```golang
// Plugin is plugin instance
type Plugin struct{}

// Enable implements plugin.Plugin
// Invoked just after initialization if plugin is already enabled.
// Invoked every time the plugin is switched to enabled.
func (c *Plugin) Enable() error {
	return nil
}

// Disable implements plugin.Plugin
// Invoked every time the plugin is switched to disabled.
func (c *Plugin) Disable() error {
	return nil
}
```

Now only the base [`Plugin`](https://godoc.org/github.com/gotify/plugin-api#Plugin) interface has been implemented.
To give it more functionalities, more interfaces can be implemented.

## APIs

### Intro

The APIs are provided as interfaces and have generally two forms:

The first form is called during plugin initialization.

> The methods are in the form of `^Register(.+)Handler$`, which plugins will implement to get a callback to the gotify engine to realize some functionalities.

Reviewer: Only one API with this pattern exist. There are also SetXXX methods for the callbacks.

An example is [`Messenger`](https://godoc.org/github.com/gotify/plugin-api#Messenger), which is called with a callback that can be called at any time to send a message to the user.

The second form is called after plugins are initialized (also after the initial `Enable()` call if the plugin is already enabled).
They require the plugin to implements some methods which is called on user request to update information or provide feedbacks.

> An example is [`Displayer`](https://godoc.org/github.com/gotify/plugin-api#Displayer), which obtains an instruction generated by the plugin, which is then relayed to the user by gotify.

Reviewer: Displayer#GetDisplay() is also called before the initial Enable(), so this is not. Lets just omit this "form" thingy completly. Because its explicitly defined on every plugin when it is called.

### API Interfaces

_These are all API interfaces exposed by gotify. Some interface implementations are omitted in the examples._

#### Displayer

[`Displayer`](https://godoc.org/github.com/gotify/plugin-api#Displayer) is the most simple form of plugin API, it is used to provide instructions on the plugin page in the WebUI.
Plugins can dynamically generate information based on the current state.
It receives a `location` parameter contains the server's hostname, port and scheme recovered from the original request to the `Displayer` API.
Markdown is supported.

The REST API for this exposed at [`/plugin/:id/display`](/api-docs#/plugin/getPluginDisplay).

```golang
// Plugin is the plugin instance
type Plugin struct {
    userCtx plugin.UserContext
}

// GetDisplay implements plugin.Displayer

> // Invoked on each API call. Plugins do not need to be enabled to handle GetDisplay calls.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// Invoked when the user views the plugin settings. Plugins do not need to be enabled to handle GetDisplay calls.
```

// Return a short and consise error here and, if you have detailed suggestions on how to solve the problem, utilize Displayer to provide more information to the user,
func (c *Plugin) ValidateAndSetConfig(c interface{}) error {
    config = c.(*Config)
    if !userNameIsValid(config.GitHubUserName) {
        return errors.New("the user name is not valid")
    }
    c.config = config
    return nil
}
```

## Effective Plugin Practices

Although we have covered how to implement plugin functionalities in the last chapter, it is very important to take these practices to make sure your plugin can be loaded successfully and works effectively.

- Use [go modules](https://github.com/golang/go/wiki/Modules) to manage dependencies, and use [gomod-cap](https://github.com/gotify/plugin-api/#githubcomgotifycmdgomod-cap) to prevent incompatible dependencies.
- Handle all errors. A panic in a goroutine spawned in the plugin can crash the whole gotify program.
- Provide detailed plugin info and utilize [`Displayer`](/docs/plugin-api#displayer) to show instructions to users. A detailed plugin info would be shown in the WebUI which makes it easier to be identified and used.

> You can clone the official plugin [template](https://github.com/gotify/plugin-template) and [showcase](https://github.com/gotify/plugins) to see plugins in action and/or to bootstrap your project.

Reviewer: gotify/plugins will be a metadata repository for existing plugins, a searchable list will be published to https://plugins.gotify.net/. It should be like https://galaxy.ansible.com/.

Just FYI (:.

Author: Okay, but I would still use the GitHub link as this is more developer oriented so maybe a GitHub like directly to the source code would be more helpful:)
